\section{Rules}

There are two competing players, black and white. Players alternate turns,
passing is not possible.

\vspace{0.5em}

\textbf{[L]ion}
is the King of the Jungle. It may not leave castle around it. Inside castle
it moves and captures as the King in Chess. If there is a vertical or diagonal
line with no pieces between the two lions, the lion may jump to the other lion
and capture it.

\vspace{0.5em}

\textbf{[Z]ebra}
moves as the Knight in classic chess.

\vspace{0.5em}

\textbf{[E]lephant}
moves one or two squares in the horizontal or vertical direction. It may jump
over the nearest square and capture the piece on the next square, and it may
jump over the river.

\vspace{0.5em}

\textbf{[G]iraffe}
moves without capture one step in any direction. It can move or capture two
steps away in any direction in a straight line.

\vspace{0.5em}

\textbf{[C]rocodile}
moves as the King in Chess when on land. Outside the river it can move
straight towards the river (including the river square) as a rook. Inside the
river it move to another river square as a rook. A crocodile cannot drown.

\vspace{0.5em}

\textbf{[P]awn}
moves and captures both straight and diagonally forward. Being on the other
side of the river, a~pawn may also move one or two squares straight back,
without the right to capture or jump. If a~pawn moves to the last row, it is
promoted to a~Superpawn.

\vspace{0.5em}

\textbf{[S]uperpawn}
has the additional powers of moving and capturing one square straight sideways
and going one or two square straight backwards or diagonally backward. When
going backwards, it may neither capture nor jump. A superpawns right to go
backwards does not depend on its position: they may go backwards at both sides
and on the river.

\vspace{0.5em}

\textbf{[M]onkey}
moves as the King in Chess while not capturing. It captures a piece by jumping
over it in any direction to the square immediately beyond, which must be
vacant. A monkey may capture multiple pieces in the same turn, but is not
obliged to do so. Once a monkey jumped over a piece, the piece immediately
disappears. If a monkey make multiple capture and ends in the river (at any
time), it immediately drowns. Captures before drowning are legal. The monkey
capturing opponent's Lion terminates the move and the game.

\vspace{0.5em}

The object of the game is to win by capturing opponent's Lion as there is only
one King of the Jungle. The game immediately ends when a lion has been
captured.

\vspace{0.5em}

There is no check in Congo, so a lion may move to an attacked square.
Consequently, Congo has no draw by stalemate.
